.TH AGENTGATE 1 "2026-04-03" "agentgate 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
agentgate \- AI Agent Security & Observability Gateway for MCP servers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B agentgate
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-db\fR \fIPATH\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B agentgate
is a transparent proxy that sits between AI agents and Model Context Protocol
(MCP) servers. It enforces security policies, records every tool invocation to
an audit log, applies rate limiting and circuit breaking, and exposes a live
dashboard for observability.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Path to a TOML configuration file.
Defaults to \fI~/.agentgate/config.toml\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-db " " \fIPATH\fR
Override the SQLite audit-log database path.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS wrap
.B agentgate wrap
[\fB\-\-policy\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-metrics\-port\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-\-dashboard\-port\fR \fIPORT\fR]
\fB\-\-\fR \fICMD\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.PP
Wrap a stdio MCP server. AgentGate spawns \fICMD\fR and proxies every
JSON-RPC message, applying policy rules and logging each tool call.
.TP
.BR \-\-policy " " \fIFILE\fR
Path to a TOML policy file; overrides \fIconfig.policy_path\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-metrics\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
Expose a Prometheus \fI/metrics\fR endpoint on this port (e.g.\& 9090).
.TP
.BR \-\-dashboard\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
Port for the REST API and dashboard UI (default: 7070).
.SS serve
.B agentgate serve
\fB\-\-transport\fR \fI{sse|http}\fR
\fB\-\-upstream\fR \fIURL\fR
[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-\-header\fR \fIKEY:VALUE\fR] ...
[\fB\-\-policy\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-dashboard\-port\fR \fIPORT\fR]
.PP
Start an HTTP or SSE reverse proxy. Requests arriving on \fI\-\-port\fR
(default 7072) are forwarded to \fI\-\-upstream\fR, with policy enforcement
and logging applied to every tool call.
.SS logs
.B agentgate logs
[\fB\-\-tool\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-status\fR \fISTATUS\fR]
[\fB\-\-limit\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-jsonl\fR]
.PP
Query and display tool-invocation records from the audit database.
\fISTATUS\fR is one of \fBallowed\fR, \fBdenied\fR, \fBerror\fR,
\fBrate_limited\fR. Use \fB\-\-jsonl\fR to emit one JSON object per line
for piping to \fBjq\fR(1).
.SS init
.B agentgate init
.PP
Scaffold the default configuration and policy files under
\fI~/.agentgate/\fR. Safe to re\-run; existing files are never overwritten.
.SS doctor
.B agentgate doctor
.PP
Run a series of pre-flight checks and report any problems found:
directory permissions, config validity, database writability, port
availability, and policy-file correctness.
.SH POLICY FILE
Policy files are TOML documents containing an ordered list of
\fB[[rules]]\fR tables. Rules are evaluated top-to-bottom; the first match
wins. Available actions: \fBallow\fR, \fBdeny\fR, \fBredact\fR.
.PP
See \fIpolicies/example.toml\fR in the source repository for annotated examples.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used to resolve the default config directory (\fI$HOME/.agentgate\fR).
.TP
.B AGENTGATE_LOG
Set to \fBdebug\fR or \fBtrace\fR for verbose logging output.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.agentgate/config.toml
Default configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.agentgate/logs.db
SQLite audit log.
.TP
.I ~/.agentgate/policies/default.toml
Default policy file (created by \fBinit\fR).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error or a failing \fBdoctor\fR check.
.PP
When wrapping a child process, AgentGate exits with the same code as the
child unless killed by a signal, in which case it exits with code 1.
.SH EXAMPLES
Wrap the filesystem MCP server with a deny policy:
.PP
.nf
agentgate wrap --policy ~/.agentgate/policies/default.toml \\
    -- npx @modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem /workspace
.fi
.PP
Proxy a remote SSE server on port 7072:
.PP
.nf
agentgate serve --transport sse \\
    --upstream https://mcp.example.com \\
    --header "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
.fi
.PP
View the last 20 denied calls:
.PP
.nf
agentgate logs --status denied --limit 20
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mcp (1),
.BR jq (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the AgentGate contributors.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at <https://github.com/iamdanwi/agentgate/issues>.
